---
title: "chapter 3: interlocking directorates"
layout: post
---

The practice of interlocking directorates is the root of many evils. It offends
laws human and divine. Applied to rival corporations, it tends to the
suppression of competition and to violation of the Sherman law. Applied to
corporations which deal with each other, it tends to disloyalty and to
violation of the fundamental law that no man can serve two masters. In either
event it tends to inefficiency; for it removes incentive and destroys soundness
of judgment. It is undemocratic, for it rejects the platform: "A fair field and
no favors,"—substituting the pull of privilege for the push of manhood. It is
the most potent instrument of the Money Trust. Break the control so exercised
by the investment bankers over railroads, public-service and industrial
corporations, over banks, life insurance and trust companies, and a long step
will have been taken toward attainment of the New Freedom.

The term "Interlocking directorates" is here used in a broad sense as including
all intertwined conflicting interests, whatever the form, and by whatever
device effected. The objection extends alike to contracts of a corporation
whether with one of its directors individually, or with a firm of which he is a
member, or with another corporation in which he is interested as an officer or
director or stockholder. The objection extends likewise to men holding the
inconsistent position of director in two potentially competing corporations,
even if those corporations do not actually deal with each other.

## The Endless Chain

A single example will illustrate the vicious circle of control—the endless
chain—through which our financial oligarchy now operates:

J. P. Morgan (or a partner), a director of the New York, New Haven & Hartford
Railroad, causes that company to sell to J. P. Morgan & Co. an issue of bonds.
J. P. Morgan & Co. borrow the money with which to pay for the bonds from the
Guaranty Trust Company, of which Mr. Morgan (or a partner) is a director. J. P.
Morgan & Co. sell the bonds to the Penn Mutual Life Insurance Company, of which
Mr. Morgan (or a partner) is a director. The New Haven spends the proceeds of
the bonds in purchasing steel rails from the United States Steel Corporation,
of which Mr. Morgan (or a partner) is a director. The United States Steel
Corporation spends the proceeds of the rails in purchasing electrical supplies
from the General Electric Company, of which Mr. Morgan (or a partner) is a
director. The General Electric sells supplies to the Western Union Telegraph
Company, a subsidiary of the American Telephone and Telegraph Company; and in
both Mr. Morgan (or a partner) is a director. The Telegraph Company has an
exclusive wire contract with the Reading, of which Mr. Morgan (or a partner) is
a director. The Reading buys its passenger cars from the Pullman Company, of
which Mr. Morgan (or a partner) is a director. The Pullman Company buys (for
local use) locomotives from the Baldwin Locomotive Company, of which Mr. Morgan
(or a partner) is a director. The Reading, the General Electric, the Steel
Corporation and the New Haven, like the Pullman, buy locomotives from the
Baldwin Company. The Steel Corporation, the Telephone Company, the New Haven,
the Reading, the Pullman and the Baldwin Companies, like the Western Union, buy
electrical supplies from the General Electric. The Baldwin, the Pullman, the
Reading, the Telephone, the Telegraph and the General Electric companies, like
the New Haven, buy steel products from the Steel Corporation. Each and every
one of the companies last named markets its securities through J. P. Morgan &
Co.; each deposits its funds with J. P. Morgan & Co.; and with these funds of
each, the firm enters upon further operations.

This specific illustration is in part supposititious; but it represents
truthfully the operation of interlocking directorates. Only it must be
multiplied many times and with many permutations to represent fully the extent
to which the interests of a few men are intertwined. Instead of taking the New
Haven as the railroad starting point in our example, the New York Central, the
Santa Fe, the Southern, the Lehigh Valley, the Chicago and Great Western, the
Erie or the Père Marquette might have been selected; instead of the Guaranty
Trust Company as the banking reservoir, any one of a dozen other important
banks or trust companies; instead of the Penn Mutual as purchaser of the bonds,
other insurance companies; instead of the General Electric, its qualified
competitor, the Westinghouse Electric and Manufacturing Company. The chain is
indeed endless; for each controlled corporation is entwined with many others.

As the nexus of "Big Business" the Steel Corporation stands, of course,
preeminent: The Stanley Committee showed that the few men who control the Steel
Corporation, itself an owner of important railroads, are directors also in
twenty-nine other railroad systems, with 126,000 miles of line (more than half
the railroad mileage of the United States), and in important steamship
companies. Through all these alliances and the huge traffic it controls, the
Steel Corporation's influence pervades railroad and steamship companies—not as
carriers only—but as the largest customers for steel. And its influence with
users of steel extends much further. These same few men are also directors in
twelve steel-using street railway systems, including some of the largest in the
world. They are directors in forty machinery and similar steel-using
manufacturing companies; in many gas, oil and water companies, extensive users
of iron products; and in the great wire-using telephone and telegraph
companies. The aggregate assets of these different corporations—through which
these few men exert their influence over the business of the United
States—exceeds sixteen billion dollars.

Obviously, interlocking directorates, and all that term implies, must be
effectually prohibited before the freedom of American business can be regained.
The prohibition will not be an innovation. It will merely give full legal
sanction to the fundamental law of morals and of human nature: that "No man can
serve two masters." The surprising fact is that a principle of equity so firmly
rooted should have been departed from at all in dealing with corporations. For
no rule of law has, in other connections, been more rigorously applied, than
that which prohibits a trustee from occupying inconsistent positions, from
dealing with himself, or from using his fiduciary position for personal profit.
And a director of a corporation is as obviously a trustee as persons holding
similar positions in an unincorporated association, or in a private trust
estate, who are called specifically by that name. The Courts have recognized
this fully.

Thus, the Court of Appeals of New York declared in an important case:

> "While not technically trustees, for the title of the corporate property was
> in the corporation itself, they were charged with the duties and subject to
> the liabilities of trustees. Clothed with the power of controlling the
> property and managing the affairs of the corporation without let or
> hindrance, as to third persons, they were its agents; but as to the
> corporation itself equity holds them liable as trustees. While courts of law
> generally treat the directors as agents, courts of equity treat them as
> trustees, and hold them to a strict account for any breach of the trust
> relation. For all practical purposes they are trustees, when called upon in
> equity to account for their official conduct."

## Nullifying the Law

But this wholesome rule of business, so clearly laid down, was practically
nullified by courts in creating two unfortunate limitations, as concessions
doubtless to the supposed needs of commerce.

First: Courts held valid contracts between a corporation and a director, or
between two corporations with a common director, where it was shown that in
making the contract, the corporation was represented by independent directors
and that the vote of the interested director was unnecessary to carry the
motion and his presence was not needed to constitute a quorum.

Second: Courts held that even where a common director participated actively in
the making of a contract between two corporations, the contract was not
absolutely void, but voidable only at the election of the corporation.

The first limitation ignored the rule of law that a beneficiary is entitled to
disinterested advice from all his trustees, and not merely from some; and that
a trustee may violate his trust by inaction as well as by action. It ignored,
also, the laws of human nature, in assuming that the influence of a director is
confined to the act of voting. Every one knows that the most effective work is
done before any vote is taken, subtly, and without provable participation.
Every one should know that the denial of minority representation on boards of
directors has resulted in the domination of most corporations by one or two
men; and in practically banishing all criticism of the dominant power. And even
where the board is not so dominated, there is too often that "harmonious
cooperation" among directors which secures for each, in his own line, a due
share of the corporation's favors.

The second limitation—by which contracts, in the making of which the interested
director participates actively, are held merely voidable instead of absolutely
void—ignores the teachings of experience. To hold such contracts merely
voidable has resulted practically in declaring them valid. It is the directors
who control corporate action; and there is little reason to expect that any
contract, entered into by a board with a fellow director, however unfair, would
be subsequently avoided. Appeals from Philip drunk to Philip sober are not of
frequent occurrence, nor very fruitful. But here we lack even an appealing
party. Directors and the dominant stockholders would, of course, not appeal;
and the minority stockholders have rarely the knowledge of facts which is
essential to an effective appeal, whether it be made to the directors, to the
whole body of stockholders, or to the courts. Besides, the financial burden and
the risks incident to any attempt of individual stockholders to interfere with
an existing management is ordinarily prohibitive. Proceedings to avoid
contracts with directors are, therefore, seldom brought, except after a radical
change in the membership of the board. And radical changes in a board's
membership are rare. Indeed the Pujo Committee reports:

> "None of the witnesses, (the leading American bankers testified) was able to
> name an instance in the history of the country in which the stockholders had
> succeeded in overthrowing an existing management in any large corporation.
> Nor does it appear that stockholders have ever even succeeded in so far as to
> secure the investigation of an existing management of a corporation to
> ascertain whether it has been well or honestly managed."

Mr. Max Pam proposed in the April, 1913, Harvard Law Review, that the
government come to the aid of minority stockholders. He urged that the
president of every corporation be required to report annually to the
stockholders, and to state and federal officials every contract made by the
company in which any director is interested; that the Attorney-General of the
United States or the State investigate the same and take proper proceedings to
set all such contracts aside and recover any damages suffered; or without
disaffirming the contracts to recover from the interested directors the profits
derived therefrom. And to this end also, that State and National Bank
Examiners, State Superintendents of Insurance, and the Interstate Commerce
Commission be directed to examine the records of every bank, trust company,
insurance company, railroad company and every other corporation engaged in
interstate commerce. Mr. Pam's views concerning interlocking directorates are
entitled to careful study. As counsel prominently identified with the
organization of trusts, he had for years full opportunity of weighing the
advantages and disadvantages of "Big Business." His conviction that the
practice of interlocking directorates is a menace to the public and demands
drastic legislation, is significant. And much can be said in support of the
specific measure which he proposes. But to be effective, the remedy must be
fundamental and comprehensive.

## The Essentials of Protection

Protection to minority stockholders demands that corporations be prohibited
absolutely from making contracts in which a director has a private interest,
and that all such contracts be declared not voidable merely, but absolutely
void.

In the case of railroads and public-service corporations (in contradistinction
to private industrial companies), such prohibition is demanded, also, in the
interests of the general public. For interlocking interests breed inefficiency
and disloyalty; and the public pays, in higher rates or in poor service, a
large part of the penalty for graft and inefficiency. Indeed, whether rates are
adequate or excessive cannot be determined until it is known whether the gross
earnings of the corporation are properly expended. For when a company's
important contracts are made through directors who are interested on both
sides, the common presumption that money spent has been properly spent does not
prevail. And this is particularly true in railroading, where the company so
often lacks effective competition in its own field.

But the compelling reason for prohibiting interlocking directorates is neither
the protection of stockholders, nor the protection of the public from the
incidents of inefficiency and graft. Conclusive evidence (if obtainable) that
the practice of interlocking directorates benefited all stockholders and was
the most efficient form of organization, would not remove the objections. For
even more important than efficiency are industrial and political liberty; and
these are imperiled by the Money Trust.Interlocking directorates must be
prohibited, because it is impossible to break the Money Trust without putting
an end to the practice in the larger corporations.

## Banks as Public-Service Corporations

The practice of interlocking directorates is peculiarly objectionable when
applied to banks, because of the nature and functions of those institutions.
Bank deposits are an important part of our currency system. They are almost as
essential a factor in commerce as our railways. Receiving deposits and making
loans therefrom should be treated by the law not as a private business, but as
one of the public services. And recognizing it to be such, the law already
regulates it in many ways. The function of a bank is to receive and to loan
money. It has no more right than a common carrier to use its powers
specifically to build up or to destroy other businesses. The granting or
withholding of a loan should be determined, so far as concerns the borrower,
solely by the interest rate and the risk involved; and not by favoritism or
other considerations foreign to the banking function. Men may safely be allowed
to grant or to deny loans of their own money to whomsoever they see fit,
whatsoever their motive may be. But bank resources are, in the main, not owned
by the stockholders nor by the directors. Nearly three-fourths of the aggregate
resources of the thirty-four banking institutions in which the Morgan
associates hold a predominant influence are represented by deposits. The
dependence of commerce and industry upon bank deposits, as the common reservoir
of quick capital is so complete, that deposit banking should be recognized as
one of the businesses "affected with a public interest." And the general rule
which forbids public-service corporations from making unjust discriminations or
giving undue preference should be applied to the operations of such banks.

Senator Owen, Chairman of the Committee on Banking and Currency, said recently:

> "My own judgment is that a bank is a public-utility institution and cannot be
> treated as a private affair, for the simple reason that the public is
> invited, under the safeguards of the government, to deposit its money with
> the bank, and the public has a right to have its interests safeguarded
> through organized authorities. The logic of this is beyond escape. All banks
> in the United States, public and private, should be treated as public-utility
> institutions, where they receive public deposits."

The directors and officers of banking institutions must, of course, be
entrusted with wide discretion in the granting or denying of loans. But that
discretion should be exercised, not only honestly as it affects stockholders,
but also impartially as it affects the public. Mere honesty to the stockholders
demands that the interests to be considered by the directors be the interests
of all the stockholders; not the profit of the part of them who happen to be
its directors. But the general welfare demands of the director, as trustee for
the public, performance of a stricter duty. The fact that the granting of loans
involves a delicate exercise of discretion makes it difficult to determine
whether the rule of equality of treatment, which every public-service
corporation owes, has been performed. But that difficulty merely emphasizes the
importance of making absolute the rule that banks of deposit shall not make any
loan nor engage in any transaction in which a director has a private interest.
And we should bear this in mind: If privately-owned banks fail in the public
duty to afford borrowers equality of opportunity, there will arise a demand for
government-owned banks, which will become irresistible.

The statement of Mr. Justice Holmes of the Supreme Court of the United States,
in the Oklahoma Bank case, is significant:

> "We cannot say that the public interests to which we have adverted, and
> others, are not sufficient to warrant the State in taking the whole business
> of banking under its control. On the contrary we are of opinion that it may
> go on from regulation to prohibition except upon such conditions as it may
> prescribe."

## Official Precedents

Nor would the requirement that banks shall make no loan in which a director has
a private interest impose undue hardships or restrictions upon bank directors.
It might make a bank director dispose of some of his investments and refrain
from making others; but it often happens that the holding of one office
precludes a man from holding another, or compels him to dispose of certain
financial interests.

A judge is disqualified from sitting in any case in which he has even the
smallest financial interest; and most judges, in order to be free to act in any
matters arising in their court, proceed, upon taking office, to dispose of all
investments which could conceivably bias their judgment in any matter that
might come before them. An Interstate Commerce Commissioner is prohibited from
owning any bonds or stocks in any corporation subject to the jurisdiction of
the Commission. It is a serious criminal offence for any executive officer of
the federal government to transact government business with any corporation in
the pecuniary profits of which he is directly or indirectly interested.

And the directors of our great banking institutions, as the ultimate judges of
bank credit, exercise today a function no less important to the country's
welfare than that of the judges of our courts, the interstate commerce
commissioners, and departmental heads.

## Scope of the Prohibition

In the proposals for legislation on this subject, four important questions are
presented:

1. Shall the principle of prohibiting interlocking directorates in potentially
competing corporations be applied to state banking institutions, as well as the
national banks?

2. Shall it be applied to all kinds of corporations or only to banking
institutions?

3. Shall the principle of prohibiting corporations from entering into
transactions in which the management has a private interest be applied to both
directors and officers or be confined in its application to officers only?

4. Shall the principle be applied so as to prohibit transactions with another
corporation in which one of its directors is interested merely as a
stockholder?
