---
title: "chapter 8: a curse of bigness"
layout: post
---

Bigness has been an important factor in the rise of the Money Trust: Big
railroad systems, Big industrial trusts, big public service companies; and as
instruments of these Big banks and Big trust companies. J. P. Morgan & Co. (in
their letter of defence to the Pujo Committee) urge the needs of Big Business
as the justification for financial concentration. They declare that what they
euphemistically call "cooperation" is "simply a further result of the necessity
for handling great transactions"; that "the country obviously requires not only
the larger individual banks, but demands also that those banks shall cooperate
to perform efficiently the country's business"; and that "a step backward along
this line would mean a halt in industrial progress that would affect every
wage-earner from the Atlantic to the Pacific." The phrase "great transactions"
is used by the bankers apparently as meaning large corporate security issues.

Leading bankers have undoubtedly cooperated during the last 15 years in
floating some very large security issues, as well as many small ones. But
relatively few large issues were made necessary by great improvements
undertaken or by industrial development. Improvements and development
ordinarily proceed slowly. For them, even where the enterprise involves large
expenditures, a series of smaller issues is usually more appropriate than
single large ones. This is particularly true in the East where the building of
new railroads has practically ceased. The "great" security issues in which
bankers have cooperated were, with relatively few exceptions, made either for
the purpose of effecting combinations or, as a consequence of such
combinations. Furthermore, the combinations which made necessary these large
security issues or underwritings were, in most cases, either contrary to
existing statute law, or contrary to laws recommended by the Interstate
Commerce Commission, or contrary to the laws of business efficiency. So both
the financial concentration and the combinations which they have served were,
in the main, against the public interest. Size, we are told, is not a crime.
But size may, at least, become noxious by reason of the means through which it
was attained or the uses to which it is put. And it is size attained by
combination, instead of natural growth, which has contributed so largely to our
financial concentration. Let us examine a few cases:

## The Harriman Pacifics

J. P. Morgan & Co., in urging the "need of large banks and the cooperation of
bankers," said:

> "The Attorney-General's recent approval of the Union Pacific settlement calls
> for a single commitment on the part of bankers of $126,000,000."

This $126,000,000 "commitment" was not made to enable the Union Pacific to
secure capital. On the contrary it was a guaranty that it would succeed in
disposing of its Southern Pacific stock to that amount. And when it had
disposed of that stock, it was confronted with the serious problem—what to do
with the proceeds? This huge underwriting became necessary solely because the
Union Pacific had violated the Sherman Law. It had acquired that amount of
Southern Pacific stock illegally; and the Supreme Court of the United States
finally decreed that the illegality cease. This same illegal purchase had been
the occasion, twelve years earlier, of another "great transaction,"—the issue,
of a $100,000,000 of Union Pacific bonds, which were sold to provide funds for
acquiring this Southern Pacific and other stocks in violation of law. Bankers
"cooperated" also to accomplish that.

## Union Pacific Improvements

The Union Pacific and its auxiliary lines (the Oregon Short Line, the Oregon
Railway and Navigation and the Oregon-Washington Railroad) made, in the
fourteen years, ending June 30, 1912, issues of securities aggregating
$375,158,183 (of which $46,500,000 were refunded or redeemed) ; but the large
security issues served mainly to supply funds for engaging in illegal
combinations or stock speculation. The extraordinary improvements and additions
that raised the Union Pacific Railroad to a high state of efficiency were
provided mainly by the net earnings from the operation of its railroads. And
note how great the improvements and additions were: Tracks were straightened,
grades were lowered, bridges were rebuilt, heavy rails were laid, old equipment
was replaced by new; and the cost of these was charged largely as operating
expense. Additional equipment was added, new lines were built or acquired,
increasing the system by 3524 miles of line, and still other improvements and
betterments were made and charged to capital account. These expenditures
aggregated $191,512,328. But it needed no "large security issues" to provide
the capital thus wisely expended. The net earnings from the operations of these
railroads were so large that nearly all these improvements and additions could
have been made without issuing on the average more than $1,000,000 a year of
additional securities for "new money," and the company still could have paid
six per cent. dividends after 1906 (when that rate was adopted). For while
$13,679,452 a year, on the average, was charged to Cost of Road and Equipment,
the surplus net earnings and other funds would have yielded, on the average,
$12,750,982 a year available for improvements and additions, without raising
money on new security issues.

## How the Security Proceeds Were Spent

The $375,000,000 securities (except to the extent of about $13,000,000 required
for improvements, and the amounts applied for refunding and redemptions) were
available to buy stocks and bonds of other companies. And some of the stocks so
acquired were sold at large profits, providing further sums to be employed in
stock purchases.

The $375,000,000 Union Pacific Lines security issues, therefore, were not
needed to supply funds for Union Pacific improvements; nor did these issues
supply funds for the improvement of any of the companies in which the Union
Pacific invested (except that certain amounts were advanced later to aid in
financing the Southern Pacific).They served, substantially, no purpose save to
transfer the ownership of railroad stocks from one set of persons to another.

Here are some of the principal investments:

1. $91,657,500, in acquiring and financing the Southern Pacific.

2. $89,391,401, in acquiring the Northern Pacific stock and stock of the
   Northern Securities Co.

3. $45,466,960, in acquiring Baltimore & Ohio. stock.

4. $37,692,256, in acquiring Illinois Central stock.

5. $23,205,679, in acquiring New York Central stock.

6. $10,395,000, in acquiring Atchison, Topeka & Santa Fe stock.

7. $8,946,781, in acquiring Chicago & Alton stock.

8. $11,610,187, in acquiring Chicago, Milwaukee & St. Paul stock.

9. $6,750,423, in acquiring Chicago & Northwestern stock.

10. $6,936,696, in acquiring Railroad Securities Co. stock (Illinois Central
    stock).

The immediate effect of these stock acquisitions, as stated by the Interstate
Commerce Commission in 1907, was merely this:

> "Mr. Harriman may journey by steamship from New York to New Orleans, thence
> by rail to San Francisco, across the Pacific Ocean to China, and, returning
> by another route to the United States, may go to Ogden by any one of three
> rail lines, and thence to Kansas City or Omaha, without leaving the deck or
> platform of a carrier which he controls, and without duplicating any part of
> his journey.
>
> "He has further what appears to be a dominant control in the Illinois Central
> Railroad running directly north from the Gulf of Mexico to the Great Lakes,
> parallel to the Mississippi River; and two thousand miles west of the
> Mississippi River he controls the only line of railroad parallel to the
> Pacific Coast, and running from the Colorado River to the Mexican border. ...
>
> "The testimony taken at this hearing shows that about fifty thousand square
> miles of territory in the State of Oregon, surrounded by the lines of the
> Oregon Short Line Railroad Company, the Oregon Railroad and Navigation
> Company, and the Southern Pacific Company, is not developed. While the funds
> of those companies which could be used for that purpose are being invested in
> stocks like the New York Central and other lines having only a remote
> relation to the territory in which the Union Pacific System is located."

Mr. Harriman succeeded in becoming director in 27 railroads with 39,354 miles
of line; and they extended from the Atlantic to the Pacific; from the Great
Lakes to the Gulf of Mexico.

## The Aftermath

On September 9, 1909, less than twelve years after Mr. Harriman first became a
director in the Union Pacific, he died from overwork at the age of 61. But it
was not death only that had set a limit to his achievements. The multiplicity
of his interests prevented him from performing for his other railroads the
great services that had won him a world-wide reputation as manager and
rehabilitator of the Union Pacific and the Southern Pacific. Within a few
months after Mr. Harriman's death the serious equipment scandal on the Illinois
Central became public, culminating in the probable suicide of one of the
vice-presidents of that company. The Chicago & Alton (in the management of
which Mr. Harriman was prominent from 1899 to 1907, as President, Chairman of
the Board, or Executive Committeeman), has never regained the prosperity it
enjoyed before he and his associates acquired control. The Père Marquette has
passed again into receiver's hands. Long before Mr. Harriman’s death the Union
Pacific had disposed of its Northern Pacific stock, because the Supreme Court
of the United States declared the Northern Securities Company illegal, and
dissolved the Northern Pacific-Great Northern merger. Three years after his
death, the Supreme Court of the United States ordered the Union
Pacific-Southern Pacific merger dissolved. By a strange irony, the law has
permitted the Union Pacific to reap large profits from its illegal transactions
in Northern Pacific and Southern Pacific stocks. But many other stocks held "as
investments" have entailed large losses. Stocks in the Illinois Central and
other companies which cost the Union Pacific $129,894,991.72, had on November
15, 1913, a market value of only $87,851,500; showing a shrinkage of
$42,043,491.72 and the average income from them, while held, was only about
4.30 per cent. on their cost.

## A Banker's Paradise

Kuhn, Loeb & Co. were the Union Pacific bankers. It was in pursuance of a
promise which Mr. Jacob H. Schiff—the senior partner—had given, pending the
reorganization, that Mr. Harriman first became a member of the Executive
Committee in 1897. Thereafter combinations grew and crumbled, and there were
vicissitudes in stock speculations. But the investment bankers prospered
amazingly; and financial concentration proceeded without abatement. The bankers
and their associates received the commissions paid for purchasing the stocks
which the Supreme Court holds to have been acquired illegally—and have retained
them. The bankers received commissions for underwriting the securities issued
to raise the money with which to buy the stocks which the Supreme Court holds
to have been illegally acquired, and have retained them. The bankers received
commissions paid for floating securities of the controlled companies—while they
were thus controlled in violation of law—and have, of course, retained them.
Finally when, after years, a decree is entered to end the illegal combination,
these same bankers are on hand to perform the services of undertaker—and
receive further commissions for their banker-aid in enabling the law-breaking
corporation to end its wrong doing and to comply with the decree of the Supreme
Court. And yet, throughout nearly all this long period, both before and after
Mr. Harriman's death, two partners in Kuhn, Loeb & Co. were directors or
members of the executive committee of the Union Pacific; and as such must be
deemed responsible with others for the illegal acts.

Indeed, these bankers have not only received commissions for the underwritings
of transactions accomplished, though illegal; they have received commissions
also for merely agreeing to underwrite a "great transaction" which the
authorities would not permit to be accomplished. The $126,000,000 underwriting
(that "single commitment on the part of the bankers" to which J. P. Morgan &
Co. refer as being called for by "the Attorney General's approval of the Union
Pacific settlement") never became effective; because the Public Service
Commission of California refused to approve the terms of settlement. But the
Union Pacific, nevertheless, paid the Kuhn Loeb Syndicate a large underwriting
fee for having been ready and willing "to serve" should the opportunity arise:
and another underwriting commission was paid when the Southern Pacific stock
was finally distributed, with the approval of Attorney General McReynolds,
under the Court's decree. Thus the illegal purchase of Southern Pacific stock
yielded directly four crops of commissions; two when it was acquired, and two
when it was disposed of. And during the intervening period the illegally
controlled Southern Pacific yielded many more commissions to the bankers. For
the schedules filed with the Pujo Committee show that Kuhn, Loeb & Co.
marketed, in addition to the Union Pacific securities above referred to,
$334,000,000 of Southern Pacific and Central Pacific securities between 1903
and 1911.

The aggregate amount of the commissions paid to these bankers in connection
with Union Pacific-Southern Pacific transactions is not disclosed. It must have
been very large; for not only were the transactions "great"; but the
commissions were liberal. The Interstate Commerce Commission finds that bankers
received about 5 per cent. on the purchase price for buying the first 750,000
shares of Southern Pacific stock; and the underwriting commission on the first
$100,000,000 Union Pacific bonds issued to make that and other purchases was
$5,000,000. How large the two underwriting commissions were which the Union
Pacific paid in effecting the severance of this illegal merger, both the
company and the bankers have declined to disclose. Furthermore the Interstate
Commerce Commission showed, clearly, while investigating the Union Pacific's
purchase of the Chicago & Alton stock, that the bankers' profits were by no
means confined to commissions.

## The Burlington

Such railroad combinations produce injury to the public far more serious than
the heavy tax of bankers' commissions and profits. For in nearly every case the
absorption into a great system of a theretofore independent railroad has
involved the loss of financial independence to some community, property or men,
who thereby become subjects or satellites of the Money Trust. The passing of
the Chicago, Burlington & Quincy, in 1901, to the Morgan associates, presents a
striking example of this process.

After the Union Pacific acquired the Southern Pacific stock in 1901, it sought
control, also, of the Chicago, Burlington & Quincy,—a most prosperous railroad,
having then 7912 miles of line. The Great Northern and Northern Pacific
recognized that Union Pacific control of the Burlington would exclude them from
much of Illinois, Missouri, Wisconsin, Kansas, Nebraska, Iowa, and South
Dakota. The two northern roads, which were already closely allied with each
other and with J. P. Morgan & Co., thereupon purchased for $215,227,000, of
their joint 4 per cent. bonds, nearly all of the $109,324,000 (par value)
outstanding Burlington stock. A struggle with the Union Pacific ensued which
yielded soon to

"harmonious cooperation." The Northern Securities Company was formed with
$400,000,000 capital, thereby merging the Great Northern, the Northern Pacific
and the Burlington, and joining the Harriman, Kuhn-Loeb, with the Morgan-Hill
interests. Obviously neither the issue of $215,000,000 joint 4's, nor the issue
of the $400,000,000 Northern Securities stock supplied one dollar of funds for
improvements of, or additions to, any of the four great railroad systems
concerned in these "large transactions." The sole effect of issuing
$615,000,000 of securities was to transfer stock from one set of persons to
another. And the resulting "harmonious cooperation" was soon interrupted by the
government proceedings, which ended with the dissolution of the Northern
Securities Company. But the evil done outlived the combination. The Burlington
had passed forever from its independent Boston owners to the Morgan allies, who
remain in control.

The Burlington—one of Boston's finest achievements—was the creation of John M.
Forbes. He was a builder; not a combiner, or banker, or wizard of finance. He
was a simple, hard-working business man. He had been a merchant in China at a
time when China's trade was among America's big business. He had been connected
with shipping and with manufacturers. He had the imagination of the great
merchant; the patience and perseverance of the great manufacturer; the courage
of the sea-farer; and the broad view of the statesman. Bold, but never
reckless; scrupulously careful of other people's money, he was ready, after due
weighing of chances, to risk his own in enterprises promising success. He was
in the best sense of the term, a great adventurer. Thus equipped, Mr. Forbes
entered, in 1852, upon those railroad enterprises which later developed into
the Chicago, Burlington & Quincy. Largely with his own money and that of
friends who confided in him, he built these railroads and carried them through
the panic of '57, when the "great banking houses" of those days lacked courage
to assume the burdens of a struggling ill-constructed line, staggering under
financial difficulties.

Under his wise management, and that of the men whom he trained, the little
Burlington became a great system. It was "built on honor," and managed
honorably. It weathered every other great financial crisis, as it did that of
1857. It reached maturity without a reorganization or the sacrifice of a single
stockholder or bondholder.

Investment bankers had no place on the Burlington Board of Directors; nor had
the banker-practice, of being on both sides of a bargain. "I am unwilling,"
said Mr. Forbes, early in his career, "to run the risk of having the imputation
of buying from a company in which I am interested." About twenty years later he
made his greatest fight to rescue the Burlington from the control of certain
contractor-directors, whom his biographer, Mr. Pearson, describes as "persons
of integrity, who had conceived that in their twofold capacity as contractors
and directors they were fully able to deal with themselves justly." Mr. Forbes
thought otherwise. The stockholders, whom he had aroused, sided with him and he
won.

Mr. Forbes was the pioneer among Boston railroad-builders. His example and his
success inspired many others, for Boston was not lacking then in men who were
builders, though some lacked his wisdom, and some his character. Her enterprise
and capital constructed, in large part, the Union Pacific, the Atchison, the
Mexican Central, the Wisconsin Central, and 24 other railroads in the West and
South. One by one these western and southern railroads passed out of Boston
control; the greater part of them into the control of the Morgan allies. Before
the Burlington was surrendered, Boston had begun to lose her dominion, even,
over the railroads of New England. In 1900 the Boston & Albany was leased to
the New York Central,—a Morgan property; and a few years later, another Morgan
railroad—the New Haven—acquired control of nearly every other transportation
line in New England. Now nothing is left of Boston's railroad dominion in the
West and South, except the Eastern Kentucky Railroad—a line 36 miles long; and
her control of the railroads of Massachusetts is limited to the Grafton & Upton
with 19 miles of line and the Boston, Revere Beach & Lynn,—a passenger road 13
miles long.

## The New Haven Monopoly

The rise of the New Haven Monopoly presents another striking example of
combination as a developer of financial concentration; and it illustrates also
the use to which "large security issues" are put.

In 1892, when Mr. Morgan entered the New Haven directorate, it was a very
prosperous little railroad with capital liabilities of $25,000,000 paying 10
per cent. dividends, and operating 508 miles of line. By 1899 the
capitalization had grown to $80,477,600, but the aggregate mileage had also
grown (mainly through merger or leases of other lines) to 2017. Fourteen years
later, in 1913, when Mr. Morgan died and Mr. Mellen resigned, the mileage was
1997, just 20 miles less than in 1899; but the capital liabilities had
increased to $425,935,000. Of course the business of the railroad had grown
largely in those fourteen years; the road-bed was improved, bridges built,
additional tracks added, and much equipment purchased; and for all this, new
capital was needed; and additional issues were needed, also, because the
company paid out in dividends more than it earned. But of the capital increase,
over $200,000,000 was expended in the acquisition of the stock or other
securities of some 121 other railroads, steamships, street railway-,
electric-light-, gas- and water-companies. It was these outside properties,
which made necessary the much discussed $67,000,000, 6 per cent. bond issue, as
well as other large and expensive security issues. For in these fourteen years
the improvements on the railroad including new equipment have cost, on the
average, only $10,000,000 a year.

## The New Haven Bankers

Few, if any, of those 121 companies which the New Haven acquired had, prior to
their absorption by it, been financed by J. P. Morgan & Co. The needs of the
Boston & Maine and Maine Central—the largest group—had, for generations, been
met mainly through their own stockholders or through Boston banking houses. No
investment banker had been a member of the Board of Directors of either of
those companies. The New York, Ontario & Western—the next largest of the
acquired railroads—had been financed in New York, but by persons apparently
entirely independent of the Morgan allies. The smaller Connecticut railroads,
now combined in the Central New England, had been financed mainly in
Connecticut, or by independent New York bankers. The financing of the street
railway companies had been done largely by individual financiers, or by small
and independent bankers in the states or cities where the companies operate.
Some of the steamship companies had been financed by their owners, some through
independent bankers. As the result of the absorption of these 121 companies
into the New Haven system, the financing of all these railroads, steamship
companies, street railways, and other corporations, was made tributary to J. P.
Morgan & Co.; and the independent bankers were eliminated or became
satellites.And this financial concentration was proceeded with, although
practically every one of these 121 companies was acquired by the New Haven in
violation either of the state or federal law, or of both. Enforcement of the
Sherman Act will doubtless result in dissolving this unwieldy illegal
combination.

## The Coal Monopoly

Proof of the "cooperation" of the anthracite railroads is furnished by the
ubiquitous presence of George F. Baker on the Board of Directors of the
Reading, the Jersey Central, the Lackawanna, the Lehigh, the Erie, and the New
York, Susquehanna & Western railroads, which together control nearly all the
unmined anthracite as well as the actual tonnage. These roads have been an
important factor in the development of the Money Trust. They are charged by the
Department of Justice with fundamental violations both of the Sherman Law and
of the Commodity clause of the Hepburn Act, which prohibits a railroad from
carrying, in interstate trade, any commodity in which it has an interest,
direct or indirect. Nearly every large issue of securities made in the last 14
years by any of these railroads (except the Erie), has been in connection with
some act of combination. The combination of the anthracite railroads to
suppress the construction, through the Temple Iron Company, of a competing coal
road, has already been declared illegal by the Supreme Court of the United
States. And in the bituminous coal field—the Kanawha District—the United States
Circuit Court of Appeals has recently decreed that a similar combination by the
Lake Shore, the Chesapeake & Ohio, and the Hocking Valley, be dissolved.  Other
Railroad Companies

The cases of the Union Pacific and of the New Haven are typical—not
exceptional. Our railroad history presents numerous instances of large security
issues made wholly or mainly to effect combinations. Some of these combinations
have been proper as a means of securing natural feeders or extensions of main
lines. But far more of them have been dictated by the desire to suppress active
or potential competition; or by personal ambition or greed; or by the mistaken
belief that efficiency grows with size.

Thus the monstrous combination of the Rock Island and the St. Louis and San
Francisco with over 14,000 miles of line is recognized now to have been
obviously inefficient. It was severed voluntarily; but, had it not been, must
have crumbled soon from inherent defects, if not as a result of proceedings
under the Sherman law. Both systems are suffering now from the effects of this
unwise combination; the Frisco, itself greatly overcombined, has paid the
penalty in receivership. The Rock Island—a name once expressive of railroad
efficiency and stability—has, through its excessive recapitalizations and
combinations, become a football of speculators, and a source of great
apprehension to confiding investors. The combination of the Cincinnati,
Hamilton and Dayton, and the Père Marquette led to several receiverships.

There are, of course, other combinations which have not been disastrous to the
owners of the railroads. But the fact that a railroad combination has not been
disastrous does not necessarily justify it. The evil of the concentration of
power is obvious; and as combination necessarily involves such concentration of
power, the burden of justifying a combination should be placed upon those who
seek to effect it.

For instance, what public good has been subserved by allowing the Atlantic
Coast Line Railroad Company to issue $50,000,000 of securities to acquire
control of the Louisville & Nashville Railroad—a widely extended,
self-sufficient system of 5,000 miles, which, under the wise management of
President Milton H. Smith had prospered continuously for many years before the
acquisition; and which has gross earnings nearly twice as large as those of the
Atlantic Coast Line. The legality of this combination has been recently
challenged by Senator Lea; and an investigation by the Interstate Commerce
Commission has been ordered.

## The Pennsylvania

The reports from the Pennsylvania suggest the inquiry whether even this
generally well-managed railroad is not suffering from excessive bigness. After
1898 it, too, bought, in large amounts, stocks in other railroads, including
the Chesapeake & Ohio, the Baltimore & Ohio, and the Norfolk & Western. In 1906
it sold all its Chesapeake & Ohio stock, and a majority of its Baltimore & Ohio
and Norfolk & Western holdings. Later it reversed its policy and resumed stock
purchases, acquiring, among others, more Norfolk & Western and New York, New
Haven & Hartford; and on Dec. 31, 1912, held securities valued at
$331,909,154.32; of which, however, a large part represents Pennsylvania System
securities. These securities (mostly stocks) constitute about one-third of the
total assets of the Pennsylvania Railroad. The income on these securities in
1912 averaged only 4.30 per cent. on their valuation, while the Pennsylvania
paid 6 per cent. on its stock. But the cost of carrying these foreign stocks is
not limited to the difference between this income and outgo. To raise money on
these stocks the Pennsylvania had to issue its own securities; and there is
such a thing as an over-supply even of Pennsylvania securities. Over-supply of
any stock depresses market values, and increases the cost to the Pennsylvania
of raising new money. Recently came the welcome announcement of the management
that it will dispose of its stocks in the anthracite coal mines; and it is
intimated that it will divest itself also of other holdings in companies (like
the Cambria Steel Company) extraneous to the business of railroading. This
policy should be extended to include the disposition also of all stock in other
railroads (like the Norfolk & Western, the Southern Pacific and the New Haven)
which are not a part of the Pennsylvania System.

## Recommendations

Six years ago the Interstate Commerce Commission, after investigating the Union
Pacific transaction above referred to, recommended legislation to remedy the
evils there disclosed. Upon concluding recently its investigation of the New
Haven, the Commission repeated and amplified those recommendations, saying:

> "No student of the railroad problem can doubt that a most prolific source of
> financial disaster and complication to railroads in the past has been the
> desire and ability of railroad managers to engage in enterprises outside the
> legitimate operation of their railroads, especially by the acquisition of
> other railroads and their securities. The evil which results, first, to the
> investing public, and, finally, to the general public, cannot be corrected
> after the transaction has taken place; it can be easily and effectively
> prohibited. In our opinion the following propositions lie at the foundation
> of all adequate regulation of interstate railroads:
>
> 1. Every interstate railroad should be prohibited from spending money or
>    incurring liability or acquiring property not in the operation of its
>    railroad or in the legitimate improvement, extension, or development of
>    that railroad.
>
> 2. No interstate railroad should be permitted to lease or purchase any other
>    railroad, nor to acquire the stocks or securities of any other railroad,
>    nor to guarantee the same, directl[y] or indirectly, without the approval
>    of the federal government.
>
> 3. No stocks or bonds should be issued by an interstate railroad except for
>    the purposes sanctioned in the two preceding paragraphs, and none should
>    be issued without the approval of the federal government.
>
> It may be unwise to attempt to specify the price at which and the manner in
> which railroad stocks and securities shall be disposed of; but it is easy and
> safe to define the purpose for which they may be issued and to confine the
> expenditure of the money realized to that purpose."

These recommendations are in substantial accord with those adopted by the
National Association of Railway Commissioners. They should be enacted into law.
And they should be supplemented by amendments of the Commodity Clause of the
Hepburn Act, so that:

1. Railroads will be effectually prohibited from owning stock in corporations
whose products they transport;

2. Such corporations will be prohibited from owning important stockholdings in
railroads; and

3. Holding companies will be prohibited from controlling, as does the Reading,
both a railroad and corporations whose commodities it transports.

If laws such as these are enacted and duly enforced, we shall be protected from
a recurrence of tragedies like the New Haven, of domestic scandals like the
Chicago and Alton, and of international ones like the Frisco. We shall also
escape from that inefficiency which is attendant upon excessive size. But what
is far more important, we shall, by such legislation, remove a potent factor in
financial concentration. Decentralization will begin. The liberated smaller
units will find no difficulty in financing their needs without bowing the knee
to money lords. And a long step will have been taken toward attainment of the
New Freedom.
